CANTO 1:

HALFWAY through his life, Dante the Pilgrim wakes to find himself lost in a dark wood. Terrified at being alone in so dismal a valley, he wanders until he comes to a hill bathed in sunlight, and his fear begins to leave him. But when he starts to climb the hill his path is blocked by three fierce beasts: first a Leopard, then a Lion, and finally a She-Wolf. They fill him with fear and drive him back down to the sunless wood. At that moment the figure of a man appears before him; it is the shade of Virgil, and the Pilgrim begs for help. Virgil tells him that he cannot overcome the beasts which obstruct his path; they must remain until a “Greyhound” comes who will drive them back to Hell. Rather by another path will the Pilgrim reach the sunlight, and Virgil promises to guide him on that path through Hell and
Purgatory, after which another spirit, more fit than Virgil, will lead him to Paradise. The Pilgrim begs Virgil to lead on, and the Guide starts ahead. The Pilgrim follows. Midway along the journey of our life I woke to find myself in a dark wood, for I had wandered off from the straight path. 3 How hard it is to tell what it was like, this wood of wilderness, savage and stubborn (the thought of it brings
back all my old fears), 6 a bitter place! Death could scarce be bitterer. But if I would show the good that came of it I must talk about things other than the good. 9 How I entered there I cannot truly say, I had become so sleepy at the moment when
I first strayed, leaving the path of truth; 12 1. The imaginary date of the poem’s beginning is the night before Good Friday in 1300, the year of the papal jubilee proclaimed by Boniface VIII. Born in 1265, Dante would be thirty-five years old, which is half the seventy years allotted to man in the Bible. but when I found myself at the foot of a hill, at the edge of the wood’s beginning, down in the valley, where I first felt my heart plunged deep in fear,
15 I raised my head and saw the hilltop shawled in morning rays of light sent from the planet that leads men straight ahead on every road. 18 And then only did terror start subsiding in my heart’s lake, which rose to heights of fear that night I spent
in deepest desperation. 21 Just as a swimmer, still with panting breath, now safe upon the shore, out of the deep, might turn for one last look at the dangerous waters, 24 so I, although my mind was turned to flee, turned round to gaze once more upon the pass that never
let a living soul escape. 27 I rested my tired body there awhile and then began to climb the barren slope (I dragged my stronger foot and limped along). 30 Beyond the point the slope begins to rise sprang up a leopard, trim and very swift! It was covered
by a pelt of many spots. 33 And, everywhere I looked, the beast was there blocking my way, so time and time again I was about to turn and go back down. 36 The hour was early in the morning then, the sun was climbing up with those same stars that
had accompanied it on the world’s first day, 39 31-51. The three beasts that block the Pilgrim’s path could symbolize the three major divisions of Hell. The spotted Leopard (32) represents Fraud (cf. Canto XVI, 106-108) and reigns over the Eighth and Ninth Circles where the Fraudulent are punished (Cantos XVIII-XXXIV). The Lion (45) symbolizes all forms of Violence that are punished in the Seventh Circle (XII-XVII). The She-Wolf (49) represents the different types of Concupisence or Incontinence that are punished in Circles Two to Five (V-VIII). the day Divine Love set their beauty turning; so the hour
and sweet season of creation encouraged me to think I could get past 42 that gaudy beast, wild in its spotted pelt, but then good hope gave way and fear returned when the figure of a lion loomed up before me, 45 and he was coming straight toward me, it
seemed, with head raised high, and furious with hunger— the air around him seemed to fear his presence. 48 And now a she-wolf came, that in her leanness seemed racked with every kind of greediness (how many people she has brought to grief!). 51

CANTO 2:

BUT THE PILGRIM begins to waver; he expresses to Virgil his misgivings about his ability to undertake the journey proposed by Virgil. His predecessors have been Aeneas and Saint Paul, and he feels unworthy to take his place in their company. But Virgil rebukes his cowardice, and relates the chain of events that led him to come to Dante. The Virgin Mary took pity on the Pilgrim in his despair and instructed Saint Lucia to aid him. The Saint turned to Beatrice because of Dante’s great love for her, and Beatrice in turn went down to Hell, into Limbo, and asked Virgil to guide her friend until that time when she herself would become his guide. The Pilgrim takes heart at Virgil’s explanation and agrees to follow him.
122. Just as Virgil, the pagan Roman poet, cannot enter the Christian Paradise because he lived before the birth of Christ and lacks knowledge of Christian salvation, so Reason can only guide the Pilgrim to a certain point: In order to enter Paradise, the Pilgrim’s guide must be Christian Grace or Revelation (Theology) in the figure of Beatrice. 124. Note the pagan terminology of Virgil’s reference to God: It expresses, as best it can, his unenlightened conception of the Supreme Authority. The day was fading and the darkening air was releasing all the creatures on our earth from their daily tasks, and I, one man alone,
3 was making ready to endure the battle of the journey, and of the pity it involved, which my memory, unerring, shall now retrace. 6 O Muses! O high genius! Help me now! O memory that wrote down what I saw, here your true excellence shall be revealed!
9 Then I began: “O poet come to guide me, tell me if you think my worth sufficient before you trust me to this arduous road. 12 You wrote about young Sylvius’s father, who went beyond, with flesh corruptible, with all his senses, to the immortal realm;
15 but if the Adversary of all evil was kind to him, considering who he was, and the consequence that was to come from him, 18 this cannot seem, to thoughtful men, unfitting, for in the highest heaven he was chosen father of glorious Rome and of her empire,
21 and both the city and her lands, in truth, were established as the place of holiness where the successors of great Peter sit. 24 And from this journey you celebrate in verse, Aeneas learned those things that were to bring victory for him, and for Rome, the Papal seat;
27 then later the Chosen Vessel, Paul, ascended to ring back confirmation of that faith which is the first step on salvation’s road. 30 But why am I to go? Who allows me to? I am not Aeneas, I am not Paul, neither I nor any man would think me worthy;
33 and so, if I should undertake the journey, I fear it might turn out an act of folly— you are wise, you see more than my words express. ” 36 As one who unwills what he willed, will change his purpose with some new second thought, completely quitting what
he first had started, 39 so I did, standing there on that dark slope, thinking, ending the beginning of that venture I was so quick to take up at the start. 42 “If I have truly understood your words, ” that shade of magnanimity replied, “your soul is burdened
burdened with that cowardice 45 which often weighs so heavily on man, it turns him from a noble enterprise like a frightened beast that shies at its own shadow. 48 To free you from this fear, let me explain the reason I came here, the words I heard
that first time I felt pity for your soul: 51 I was among those dead who are suspended, when a lady summoned me. She was so blessed and beautiful, I implored her to command me. 54 With eyes of light more bright than any star, in low, soft tones she started to address

CANTO 3:

AS THE TWO POETS enter the vestibule that leads to Hell itself, Dante sees the inscription above the gate, and he hears the screams of anguish from the damned souls. Rejected by God and not accepted by the powers of Hell, the first group of souls are “nowhere, ” because of their cowardly refusal to make a choice in life. Their punishment is to follow a banner at a furious pace forever, and to be tormented by flies and hornets. The Pilgrim recognizes several of these shades but mentions none by name. Next they come to the River Acheron, where they are greeted by the
infernal boatman, Charon. Among those doomed souls who are to be ferried across the river, Charon sees the living man and challenges him, but Virgil lets it be known that his companion must pass. Then across the landscape rushes a howling wind, which blasts the Pilgrim out of his senses, and he falls to the ground. I AM THE WAY INTO THE DOLEFUL CITY, 
I AM THE WAY INTO ETERNAL GRIEF, 
I AM THE WAY TO A FORSAKEN RACE. 3 JUSTICE IT WAS THAT MOVED
MY GREAT CREATOR; 
DIVINE OMNIPOTENCE CREATED ME, 
AND HIGHEST WISDOM JOINED WITH PRIMAL LOVE. 6 BEFORE ME NOTHING BUT ETERNAL THINGS 
WERE MADE, AND I SHALL LAST ETERNALLY. 
ABANDON EVERY HOPE, ALL YOU WHO ENTER.
9 I saw these words spelled out in somber colors inscribed along the ledge above a gate; “Master, ” I said, “these words I see are cruel. ” 12 He answered me, speaking with experience: “Now here you must leave all distrust behind; let all your cowardice die on this spot.
15 We are at the place where earlier I said you could expect to see the suffering race of souls who lost the good of intellect. ” 18 Placing his hand on mine, smiling at me in such a way that I was reassured, he led me in, into those mysteries. 21
Here sighs and cries and shrieks of lamentation echoed throughout the starless air of Hell; at first these sounds resounding made me weep: 24 5-6. Divine Omnipotence, Highest Wisdom, and Primal Love are, respectively, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Thus, the gate of Hell was created by the Trinity moved by Justice. 18. Souls who have lost sight of God. tongues confused, a language
language strained in anguish with cadences of anger, shrill outcries and raucous groans that joined with sounds of hands, 27 raising a whirling storm that turns itself forever through that air of endless black, like grains of sand swirling when a whirlwind blows. 30
And I, in the midst of all this circling horror, began, “Teacher, what are these sounds I hear? What souls are these so overwhelmed by grief?” 33 And he to me: “This wretched state of being is the fate of those sad souls who lived a life but lived it with no blame and with no praise.
36 They are mixed with that repulsive choir of angels neither faithful nor unfaithful to their God, who undecided stood but for themselves. 39 Heaven, to keep its beauty, cast them out, but even Hell itself would not receive them, for fear the damned might glory over them. ”
42 And I. “Master, what torments do they suffer that force them to lament so bitterly?” He answered: “I will tell you in few words: 45 these wretches have no hope of truly dying, and this blind life they lead is so abject it makes them envy every other fate. 48
The world will not record their having been there; Heaven’s mercy and its justice turn from them. Let’s not discuss them; look and pass them by. ” 51 And so I looked and saw a kind of banner rushing ahead, whirling with aimless speed as though it would not ever take a stand;

CANTO 4:

WAKING FROM HIS SWOON, the Pilgrim is led by Virgil to the First Circle of Hell, known as Limbo, where the sad shades of the virtuous non-Christians dwell. The souls here, including Virgil, suffer no physical torment, but they must live, in desire, without hope of seeing God. Virgil tells about Christ’s descent into Hell and His salvation of several Old Testament figures. The poets see a light glowing in the darkness, and as they proceed toward it, they are met by the four greatest (other than Virgil) pagan poets: Homer, Horace, Ovid, and Lucan, who take the Pilgrim into their group. As they come closer
to the light, the Pilgrim perceives a splendid castle, where the greatest non-Christian thinkers dwell together with other famous historical figures. Once within the castle, the Pilgrim sees, among others, Electra, Aeneas, Caesar, Saladin, Aristotle, Plato, Orpheus, Cicero, Avicenna, and Averroës. But soon they must leave; and the poets move from the radiance of the castle toward the fearful encompassing darkness. 124-126. It is perhaps a part of the punishment that the souls of all the damned are eager for their punishment to begin; those who were so willing to sin on earth, are in hell damned with a willingness to receive their just retribution. A heavy clap of thunder! I awoke from the deep sleep that drugged my
mind—startled, the way one is when shaken out of sleep. 3 I turned my rested eyes from side to side, already on my feet and, staring hard, I tried my best to find out where I was, 6 and this is what I saw: I found myself upon the brink of grief’s abysmal
abysmal valley that collects the thunderings of endless cries. 9 So dark and deep and nebulous it was, try as I might to force my sight below, I could not see the shape of anything. 12 “Let us descend into the sightless world, ” began the poet (his face was deathly pale):
“I will go first, and you will follow me. ” 15 And I, aware of his changed color, said: “But how can I go on if you are frightened? You are my constant strength when I lose heart. ” 18 And he to me: “The anguish of the souls that are down here paints my face with pity—
pity— which you have wrongly taken to be fear. 21 Let us go, the long road urges us. ” He entered then, leading the way for me down to the first circle of the abyss. 24 Down there, to judge only by what I heard, there were no wails but just the sounds of sighs rising
and trembling through the timeless air, 27 the sounds of sighs of untormented grief burdening these groups, diverse and teeming, made up of men and women and of infants. 30 Then the good master said, “You do not ask what sort of souls are these you see around
you. Now you should know before we go on farther, 33 they have not sinned. But their great worth alone was not enough, for they did not know Baptism, which is the gateway to the faith you follow, 36 and if they came before the birth of
Christ, they did not worship God the way one should; I myself am a member of this group. 39 For this defect, and for no other guilt, we here are lost. In this alone we suffer: cut off from hope, we live on in desire. ” 42 The words I heard weighed heavy on my
heart; to think that souls as virtuous as these were suspended in that limbo, and forever! 45 “Tell me, my teacher, tell me, O my master, ” I began (wishing to have confirmed by him the teachings of unerring Christian doctrine), 48 “did any ever
leave here, through his merit or with another’s help, and go to bliss?” And he, who understood my hidden question, 51 answered: “I was a novice in this place when I saw a mighty lord descend to us who wore the sign of victory as his crown. 54 He took from

CANTO 5:

FROM LIMBO Virgil leads his ward down to the threshold of the Second Circle of Hell, where for the first time he will see the damned in Hell being punished for their sins. There, barring their way, is the hideous figure of Minòs, the bestial judge of Dante’s underworld; but after strong words from Virgil, the poets are allowed to pass into the dark space of this circle, where can be heard the wailing voices of the Lustful, whose punishment consists in being forever whirled about in a dark, stormy wind. After seeing a thousand or more famous lovers — including Semiramis,
Semiramis, Dido, Helen, Achilles, and Paris — the Pilgrim asks to speak to two figures he sees together. They are Francesca da Rimini and her lover, Paolo, and the scene in which they appear is probably the most famous episode of the Inferno. At the end of the scene, the Pilgrim, who has been overcome by pity for the lovers, faints to the ground. This way I went, descending from the first into the second round, that holds less space but much more pain—stinging the soul to wailing. 3 There stands Minòs grotesquely,
grotesquely, and he snarls, examining the guilty at the entrance; he judges and dispatches, tail in coils. 6 By this I mean that when the evil soul appears before him, it confesses all, and he, who is the expert judge of sins, 9 knows to what place
in Hell the soul belongs; the times he wraps his tail around himself tell just how far the sinner must go down. 12 4. Minòs was the son of Zeus and Europa. As king of Crete he was revered for his wisdom and judicial gifts. For these qualities he became chief magistrate of the underworld in classical literature. (See Virgil, Aeneid VI, 432-433.) Although Dante did not alter Minòs’ official function, he transformed him into a demonic figure, both in his physical characteristics and in his bestial activity. The damned keep crowding up in front
of him: they pass along to judgment one by one; they speak, they hear, and then are hurled below. 15 “O you who come to the place where pain is host, ” Minos spoke out when he caught sight of me, putting aside the duties of his office, 18
“be careful how you enter and whom you trust it’s easy to get in, but don’t be fooled!” And my guide said to him: “Why keep on shouting? 21 Do not attempt to stop his fated journey; it is so willed there where the power is for what is willed; that’s all you need to know. ”
24 And now the notes of anguish start to play upon my ears; and now I find myself where sounds on sounds of weeping pound at me. 27 I came to a place where no light shone at all, bellowing like the sea racked by a tempest, when warring winds attack it from both sides.
30 The infernal storm, eternal in its rage, sweeps and drives the spirits with its blast: it whirls them, lashing them with punishment. 33 When they are swept back past their place of judgment, then come the shrieks, laments, and anguished cries; there they blaspheme
God’s almighty power. 36 I learned that to this place of punishment all those who sin in lust have been condemned, those who make reason slave to appetite; 39 31-32. The contrapasso or punishment suggests that lust (the “infernal storm” is pursued without the light of reason (in the darkness). and as the wings of starlings
starlings in the winter bear them along in wide-spread, crowded flocks, so does that wind propel the evil spirits: 42 now here, then there, and up and down, it drives them with never any hope to comfort them— hope not of rest but even of suffering less. 45 And just like
cranes in flight, chanting their lays, stretching an endless line in their formation, I saw approaching, crying their laments, 48 spirits carried along by the battling winds. And so I asked, “Teacher, tell me, what souls are these punished in the sweep of the black wind?” 51
“The first of those whose story you should know, ” my master wasted no time answering, “was empress over lands of many tongues; 54 her vicious tastes had so corrupted her she licensed every form of lust with laws to cleanse the stain of scandal she had spread;

CANTO 6:

ON RECOVERING consciousness the Pilgrim finds himself with Virgil in the Third Circle, where the Gluttons are punished. These shades are mired in filthy muck and are eternally battered by cold and dirty hail, rain, and snow. Soon the travelers come upon Cerberus, the three-headed, doglike beast who guards the Gluttons, but Virgil pacifies him with fistfuls of slime and the two poets pass on. One of the shades recognizes Dante the Pilgrim and hails him. It is Ciacco, a Florentine who, before they leave, makes a prophecy concerning the political future of Florence. As
the poets move away, the Pilgrim questions Virgil about the Last Judgment and other matters until the two arrive at the next circle. Regaining now my senses, which had fainted at the sight of these two who were kinsmen lovers, a piteous sight confusing me to tears, 3 new suffering and new sinners suffering appeared to me, no matter where I moved
or turned my eyes, no matter where I gazed. 6 I am in the third circle, in the round of rain eternal, cursed, cold, and falling heavy, unchanging beat, unchanging quality. 9 Thick hail and dirty water mixed with snow come down in torrents through
the murky air, and the earth is stinking from this soaking rain. 12 Cerberus, a ruthless and fantastic beast, with all three throats howls out his doglike sounds above the drowning sinners of this place. 15 His eyes are red, his beard is slobbered black, his belly
swollen, and he has claws for hands; he rips the spirits, flays and mangles them. 18 Under the rain they howl like dogs, lying now on one side with the other as a screen, now on the other turning, these wretched sinners. 21 13-22. In classical mythology Cerberus is a fierce three-headed dog that guards
the entrance to the Underworld, permitting admittance to all and escape to none. He is the prototype of the Gluttons, with his three howling, voracious throats that gulp down huge handfuls of muck. He has become Appetite and as such he flays and mangles the spirits who reduced their lives to a satisfaction of appetite. With his three heads, he appears to be a prefiguration of Lucifer and thus another infernal distortion of the Trinity. When the slimy Cerberus caught sight of us, he opened up his mouths and showed his fangs; his body was one mass of twitching muscles. 24
My master stooped and, spreading wide his fingers, he grabbed up heaping fistfuls of the mud and flung it down into those greedy gullets. 27 As a howling cur, hungering to get fed, quiets down with the first mouthful of his food, busy with eating, wrestling with that alone,
30 so it was with all three filthy heads of the demon Cerberus, used to barking thunder on these dead souls, who wished that they were deaf. 33 We walked across this marsh of shades beaten down by the heavy rain, our feet pressing on their emptiness that
looked like human form. 36 Each sinner there was stretched out on the ground except for one who quickly sat up straight, the moment that he saw us pass him by. 39 “O you there being led through this inferno, ” he said, “try to remember who I am, for you
had life before I gave up mine. ” 42 I said: “The pain you suffer here perhaps disfigures you beyond all recognition: I can’t remember seeing you before. 45 But tell me who you are, assigned to grieve in this sad place, afflicted by such torture that—worse
there well may be, but none more foul. ” 48 “Your own city, ” he said, “so filled with envy its cup already overflows the brim, once held me in the brighter life above. 51 36. The shades in Hell bear only the appearance of their corporeal forms, although they can be ripped and torn and otherwise suffer physical torture—just as here they are able to bear the Pilgrim’s weight. Yet they themselves evidently are airy shapes without weight (cf. Canto
VIII, 27), which will, after the Day of Judgment, be possessed of their actual bodies once more (see Canto XIII, 103). You citizens gave me the name of Ciacco; and for my sin of gluttony I am damned, as you can see, to rain that beats me weak. 54 And my sad sunken soul is not alone, for all these sinners here share in my pain and in my sin. ”

CANTO 7:

AT THE BOUNDARY of the Fourth Circle the two travelers confront clucking Plutus, the god of wealth, who collapses into emptiness at a word from Virgil. Descending farther, the Pilgrim sees two groups of angry, shouting souls who clash huge rolling weights against each other with their chests. They are the Prodigal and the Miserly. Their earthly concern with material goods prompts the Pilgrim to question Virgil about Fortune and her distribution of the worldly goods of men. After Virgil’s explanation, they descend to the banks of the swamplike river Styx, which serves as the Fifth Circle. Mired in the bog are the Wrathful, who constantly tear and mangle each other. Beneath the slime of the Styx, Virgil explains, are the Slothful; the bubbles on the muddy surface indicate their presence beneath. The poets walk around the swampy area and soon come to the foot of a high tower. “Pape Satàn, pape Satàn aleppe!” the voice of Plutus clucked these words at us, and that kind sage, to whom all things were known, 3 said reassuringly: “Do not let fear defeat you, for whatever be his power, he cannot stop our journey down this rock. ”
6 Then he turned toward that swollen face of rage, crying, “Be quiet, cursèd wolf of Hell: feed on the burning bile that rots your guts. 9 This journey to the depths does have a reason, for it is willed on high, where Michael wrought a just revenge for the bold assault on God. ”
12 As sails swollen by wind, when the ship’s mast breaks, collapse, deflated, tangled in a heap, just so the savage beast fell to the ground. 15 And then we started down a fourth abyss, making our way along the dismal slope where all the evil of the world is dumped.
18 Ah, God’s avenging justice! Who could heap up suffering and pain as strange as I saw here? How can we let our guilt bring us to this? 21 As every wave Charybdis whirls to sea comes crashing against its counter-current wave, so these folks here must
dance their roundelay. 24 More shades were here than anywhere above, and from both sides, to the sound of their own screams, straining their chests, they rolled enormous weights. 27 1. This is simple gibberish (cf. Nimrod’s speech in Canto XXXI, 67). 22-66. The Miserly and the Prodigal, linked together as those who misused
their wealth, suffer a joint punishment. Their material wealth has become a heavy weight that each group must shove against the other, since their attitudes toward wealth on earth were opposed to each other. Part of their punishment is to complete the turn of the Wheel (circle) of Fortune against which they had rebelled during their short space of life on earth. And when they met and clashed against each other they turned to push the other way, one side screaming, “Why hoard?, ” the other side, “Why waste? ” 30
And so they moved back round the gloomy circle, returning on both sides to opposite poles to scream their shameful tune another time; 33 again they came to clash and turn and roll forever in their semicircle joust. And I, my heart pierced through by such a sight,
36 spoke out, “My master, please explain to me who are these people here? Were they all priests, these tonsured souls I see there to our left?” 39 He said, “In their first life all you see here had such myopic minds they could not judge with moderation when it came to spending;
42 their barking voices make this clear enough, where when they arrive at the two points on the circle opposing guilts divide them into two. 45 The ones who have the bald spot on their heads were priests and popes and cardinals, in whom avarice
is most likely to prevail. ” 48 And I: “Master, in such a group as this I should be able to recognize a few who dirtied themselves by such crimes as these. ” 51 And he replied, “Yours is an empty hope: their undistinguished life that made them foul now makes it
harder to distinguish them. 54 Eternally the two will come to blows;then from the tomb they will be resurrected: these with tight fists, those without any hair. 57 It was squandering and hoarding that have robbed them of the lovely world, and got them

CANTO 8:

BUT BEFORE they had reached the foot of the tower, the Pilgrim had noticed two signal flames at the tower’s top, and another flame answering from a distance; soon he realizes that the flames are signals to and from Phlegyas, the boatman of the Styx, who suddenly appears in a small boat speeding across the river. Wrathful and irritated though he is, the steersman must grant the poets passage, but during the crossing an angry shade rises from the slime to question the Pilgrim. After a brief exchange of words, scornful on the part of the Pilgrim, who has recognized this sinner, the spirit grabs hold of the boat. Virgil pushes him away, praising his ward for his just scorn, while a group of the wrathful attack the wretched soul, whose name is Filippo Argenti. At the far shore the poets debark and find themselves
before the gates of the infernal City of Dis, where howling figures threaten them from the walls. Virgil speaks with them privately, but they slam the gate shut in his face. His ward is terrified, and Virgil too is shaken, but he insists that help from Heaven is already on the way. I must explain, however, that before we finally reached the foot of that high tower, our eyes had been attracted to its summit 3 by two small flames we saw flare up just there; and, so far off the eye
could hardly see, another burning torch flashed back a sign. 6 I turned to that vast sea of human knowledge: “What signal is this? And the other flame, what does it answer? And who’s doing this? ” 9 And he replied: “You should already see across the
filthy waves what has been summoned, unless the marsh’s vapors hide it from you. ” 12 A bowstring never shot an arrow off that cut the thin air any faster than a little boat I saw that very second 15 skimming along the water in our direction,
with a solitary steersman, who was shouting, “Aha, I’ve got you now, you wretched soul! ” 18 “Phlegyas, Phlegyas, this time you shout in vain, ” my lord responded, “you will have us with you no longer than it takes to cross the muck. ” 21
As one who learns of some incredible trick just played on him flares up resentfully— so, Phlegyas there was seething in his anger. 24 My leader calmly stepped into the skiff and when he was inside, he had me enter, and only then it seemed to carry weight. 27
Soon as my guide and I were in the boat the ancient prow began to plough the water, more deeply, now, than any time before. 30 And as we sailed the course of this dead channel, before me there rose up a slimy shape that said: “Who are you, who come before
before your time? ” 33 And I spoke back, “Though I come, I do not stay; but who are you, in all your ugliness?” “You see that I am one who weeps, ” he answered. 36 18. Phlegyas, the son of Mars, set fire to Apollo’s temple at Delphi, furiously enraged because Apollo had raped his daughter Coronis. For this Apollo killed him and sent him to Tartarus. Dante makes Phlegyas the demonic guardian of the Styx.
32. The “slimy shape” is Filippo Argenti (61), a member of the Adimari family. And then I said to him: “May you weep and wail, stuck here in this place forever, you damned soul, for, filthy as you are, I recognize you. ” 39 With that he stretched both hands out toward the boat but, on his guard, my teacher pushed him
back: “Away, get down there with the other curs! ” 42 And then he put his arms around my neck and kissed my face and said, “Indignant soul, blessed is she in whose womb you were conceived. 45 In the world this man was filled with
arrogance, and nothing good about him decks his memory; for this, his shade is filled with fury here. 48 Many in life esteem themselves great men who then will wallow here like pigs in mud, leaving behind them their repulsive fame. ” 51 “Master, it certainly
certainly would make me happy to see him dunked deep in this slop just once before we leave this lake—it truly would. ” 54 And he to me, “Before the other shore comes into sight, you will be satisfied: a wish like that is worthy of fulfillment. ” 57

CANTO 9:

THE HELP FROM Heaven has not yet arrived; the Pilgrim is afraid and Virgil is obviously worried. He reassures his ward by telling him that, soon after his own death, he was forced by the Sorceress Erichtho to resume mortal shape and go to the very bottom of Hell in order to bring up the soul of a traitor; thus Virgil knows the way well. But no sooner is the Pilgrim comforted than the Three Furies appear before him, on top of the tower, shrieking and tearing their breasts with their nails. They call for Medusa, whose horrible face has the power of turning anyone who looks on her to stone. Virgil turns his ward around and covers his eyes. After an “address to the reader” calling attention to the coming allegory, a strident
blast splits the air, and the poets perceive an Angel coming through the murky darkness to open the gates of the City for them. Then the angel returns on the path whence he had come, and the two travelers enter the gate. Within are great open burning sarcophagi, from which groans of torment issue. Virgil explains that these are Arch-Heretics and their lesser counterparts. The color of the coward on my face, when I realized my guide was turning back, made him quickly change the color of his own. 3 He stood alert, like one who
strains to hear; his eyes could not see far enough ahead to cut the heavy fog of that black air. 6 “But surely we were meant to win this fight, ” he said, “or else … but no, such help was promised! Oh, how much time it’s taking him to come!” 9 I saw too well how quickly he
amended his opening words with what he added on! They were different from the ones he first pronounced; 12 but nonetheless his words made me afraid, perhaps because the phrase he left unfinished I finished with worse meaning than he meant. 15 “Has anyone
before ever descended to this sad hollow’s depths from that first circle whose pain is all in having hope cut off?” 18 I put this question to him. He replied, “It is not usual for one of us to make the journey I am making now. 21 But it happens I was down
here once before, conjured by that heartless witch, Erichtho (who could recall the spirit to its body). 24 Soon after I had left my flesh in death she sent me through these walls, and down as far as the pit of Judas to bring a spirit out; 27 and that place
is the lowest and the darkest and the farthest from the sphere that circles all; I know the road, and well, you can be sure. 30 This swamp that breathes with a prodigious stink lies in a circle round the doleful city that now we cannot enter without strife. ” 33
And he said other things, but I forget them, for suddenly my eyes were drawn above, up to the fiery top of that high tower36 where in no time at all and all at once sprang up three hellish Furies stained with blood, their bodies and their gestures those of females; 39 their waists
were bound in cords of wild green hydras, horned snakes and little serpents grew as hair, and twined themselves around the savage temples. 42 And he who had occasion to know well the handmaids of the queen of timeless woe cried out to me “Look there! The fierce Erinyes!
45 22–30. Having no literary or legendary source, the story of Virgil’s descent into Hell was probably Dante’s invention. That is Megaera, the one there to the left, and that one raving on the right, Alecto, Tisiphone, in the middle. ” He said no more. 48 With flailing palms the three would beat their breasts, then tear them with their nails,
shrieking so loud, I drew close to the poet, confused with fear. 51 “Medusa, come, we’ll turn him into stone, ” they shouted all together glaring down, “how wrong we were to let off Theseus lightly! ” 54 “Now turn your back and cover up your eyes, for if the
Gorgon comes and you should see her, there would be no returning to the world! ” 57 These were my master’s words. He turned me round and did not trust my hands to hide my eyes but placed his own on mine and kept them covered. 60 O all of you

CANTO 10:

THEY COME to the tombs containing the Epicurean heretics, and as they are walking by them, a shade suddenly rises to full height in one tomb, having recognized the Pilgrim’s Tuscan dialect. It is the proud Farinata, who, in life, opposed Dante’s party; while he and the Pilgrim are conversing, another
figure suddenly rises out of the same tomb. It is the shade of Cavalcante de’ Cavalcanti, who interrupts the conversation with questions about his son Guido. Misinterpreting the Pilgrim’s confused silence as evidence of his son’s death, Cavalcante falls back into his sepulcher and Farinata resumes the conversation exactly where it had been broken off. He defends his political actions in regard to Florence and prophesies that Dante, like himself, will soon know the pain of exile. But the Pilgrim is also interested to know how it is that the damned can see the future but not the present. When his curiosity is satisfied, he asks Farinata to tell Cavalcante that his son is still alive, and that his silence was caused only by his confusion about the shade’s inability to know the present. Now onward down a narrow path, between the city’s ramparts and the suffering, my
master walks, I following close behind. 3 “O lofty power who through these impious gyres lead me around as you see fit, ” I said, “I want to know, I want to understand: 6 the people buried there in sepulchers, can they be seen? I mean, since all the lids are off the tombs and
no one stands on guard. ” 9 And he: “They will forever be locked up, when they return here from Jehoshaphat with the bodies that they left up in the world. 12 The private cemetery on this side serves Epicurus and his followers, who make the
soul die when the body dies. 15 As for the question you just put to me, it will be answered soon, while we are here; and the wish you are keeping from me will be granted. ” 18 And I: “O my good guide, I do not hide my heart; I’m trying not to talk too much, as
you have told me more than once to do. ” 21 “O Tuscan walking through our flaming city, alive, and speaking with such elegance, be kind enough to stop here for a while. 24 Your mode of speech identifies you clearly as one whose birthplace is that noble city
with which in my time, perhaps, I was too harsh. ” 27 One of the vaults resounded suddenly with these clear words, and I, intimidated, drew up a little closer to my guide, 30 who said, “What are you doing? Turn around and look at
Farinata, who has risen, you will see him from the waist up standing straight. ” 33 I already had my eyes fixed on his face, and there he stood out tall, with his chest and brow proclaiming his disdain for all this Hell. 36 14-15. The philosophy of the Epicureans taught that the highest good is temporal happiness, which is to be achieved by the practice of the virtues. In Dante’s
time Epicureans were considered heretics because they exalted temporal happiness and therefore denied the immortality of the soul and the afterlife. Epicurus is among the heretics even though he was a pagan, because he denied the immortality of the soul, a truth known even to the ancients. My guide, with a gentle push, encouraged me to move among the sepulchers toward him: “Be sure you choose your words with care, ” he said. 39 And when I reached the margin of
his tomb he looked at me, and half-contemptuously he asked, “And who would your ancestors be? ” 42 And I who wanted only to oblige him held nothing back but told him everything. At this he lifted up his brows a little, 45 then said, “Bitter enemies
of mine they were and of my ancestors and of my party; I had to scatter them not once but twice. ” 48 “They were expelled, but only to return from everywhere, ” I said, “not once but twice— an art your men, however, never mastered!” 51 Just then along that same tomb’s open
ledge a shade appeared, but just down to his chin, beside this other; I think he got up kneeling. 54 He looked around as though he hoped to see if someone else, perhaps, had come with me and, when his expectation was deceived, 57

CANTO 11:

CONTINUING THEIR WAY within the Sixth Circle, where the heretics are punished, the poets are assailed by a stench rising from the abyss ahead of them which is so strong that they must stop in order to accustom themselves to the odor. They pause beside a tomb whose inscription declares that within is Pope Anastasius. When the Pilgrim expresses his desire to pass the time of waiting profitably, Virgil proceeds to instruct him about the plan of punishments in Hell. Then, seeing that dawn is only two hours away, he urges the Pilgrim on. We reached the curving brink of a steep bank constructed of enormous
broken rocks; below us was a crueler den of pain. 3 And the disgusting overflow of stench the deep abyss was vomiting forced us back from the edge. Crouched underneath the lid 6 of some great tomb, I saw it was inscribed: “Within lies Anastasius,
the pope Photinus lured away from the straight path. ” 9 131. The “one” is Beatrice. 8-9. Anastasius II, pope from 496 to 498, was popularly believed for many centuries to be a heretic because, supposedly, he allowed Photinus, a deacon of Thessalonica who followed the heresy of Acacius, to take communion. “Our descent will have to be delayed somewhat so that our sense of smell may grow accustomed to these vile
fumes; then we will not mind them, ” 12 my master said. And I: “You will have to find some way to keep our time from being wasted. ” “That is precisely what I had in mind, ” 15 he said, and then began the lesson: “My son, within these boulders’ bounds are
three more circles, concentrically arranged like those above, 18 all tightly packed with souls; and so that, later, the sight of them alone will be enough, I’ll tell you how and why they are imprisoned. 21 All malice has injustice as its end, an end achieved by
violence or by fraud; while both are sins that earn the hate of Heaven, 24 since fraud belongs exclusively to man, God hates it more and, therefore, far below, the fraudulent are placed and suffer most. 27 In the first of the circles below are all the violent;
since violence can be used against three persons, into three concentric rounds it is divided: 30 violence can be done to God, to self, or to one’s neighbor—to him or to his goods, as my reasoned explanation will make clear. 33 By violent means a man can kill his
neighbor or wound him grievously; his goods may suffer violence by arson, theft, and devastation; 36 so, homicides and those who strike with malice, those who destroy and plunder, are all punished in the first round, but all in different groups. 39
Man can raise violent hands against himself and his own goods; so in the second round, paying the debt that never can be paid, 42 are suicides, self-robbers of your world, or those who gamble all their wealth away and weep up there when they should have rejoiced. 45
One can use violence against the deity by heartfelt disbelief and cursing Him, or by despising Nature and God’s bounty; 48 therefore, the smallest round stamps with its seal both Sodom and Cahors and all those souls who hate God in their hearts and curse His name.
51 Fraud, that gnaws the conscience of its servants, can be used on one who puts his trust in you or else on one who has no trust invested. 54 This latter sort seems only to destroy the bond of love that Nature gives to man; so in the second circle there are nests
57 of hypocrites, flatterers, dabblers in sorcery, falsifiers, thieves, and simonists, panders, seducers, grafters, and like filth.
